that's a great thing too that's a great
thing to hypothesize as your aim a
juxtaposition is not necessarily a
criticism I'm here gonna present my own
conclusions on the meaning of life which
I'd prefer to present ads how to lead a
meaningful life with a juxtaposition to
what Jordan Peterson has recently had to
say on the topic I open with an anecdote
that will probably be more appealing to
fans of Jordan Peterson and it would be
to any fans I might have I went to a
lecture at university many years ago and
the speaker who was a lifelong political
dissident atheist and critic of the CIA
told a story from his youth when he was
a true believer in the Catholic faith as
he said at the time when he was a child
he wasn't just religious he was also a
snob he didn't have a very high opinion
of the local priests and local religious
teachers he had access to so he waited
for his chance to go up to a senior
Jesuit goes after this more August
religious scholar as a small child and
he asked him a question that he'd been
preparing for some time yes and quote
how do I find God close quote
and at this the Jesuit is delighted and
laughs probably because it's a small
cute child asking his question is not
what he's expecting that day and he says
something like oh my son the fact that
you are searching means that he has
already found you I think that the red
flag here is with every other sort of
question were interested in definite
answers and yet when it comes to this
question when it comes to the question
of the meaning of life people of all
religious backgrounds people of all
faiths are really quick to divert our
attention towards some sort of notion
that the way we ask the question is the
most important part the fact that we're
questioning the fact that we're
searching all of a sudden it becomes
about the process and not the product it
becomes about the
and not the destination that's a real
red flag that your religious leader may
well just be a artist what you
should be pursuing instead is well
there's two things you should be
pursuing who you could be that'd be the
first thing
it's like cuz you're not who you could
be and you know it you have guilt and
shame and regret and and you berate
yourself for your lack of discipline and
your procrastination and all your bad
habits you know perfectly well that
you're not who you could be and
associated with that you should be
attempting to formulate some conception
of the highest good that you can
conceive of that you can articulate part
of that's definitely going to be to
develop your character as much as
possible to dispense with those parts of
you that are unworthy you know one of
the things I've told my audiences the
young guys take to this a lot I said you
should be the strongest person at your
father's funeral right now that's
something to aim for
it's a transition the generational
transition and it means that well all
the people around you are suffering
because of their loss they have someone
to turn to
can you illustrate by their behavior
that the force of character is
sufficient to move you beyond the
catastrophe and you need that and that's
a great thing too it's a great thing to
hypothesize as your aim and happiness
just evaporates as irrelevant in light
of that sort of conceptualization the
human spirit
fundamentally triumphs over death and so
that's that's optimism you know in the
midst of the Sorel and the malevolence
we have the capacity we have the
capacity sorry we have the capacity to
transcend that then there isn't anything
more optimistic than that and there's
nothing there's nothing in it that isn't
good some things are true on a small
scale when dealing with pragmatic
particulars but then they can't be
scaled up and generalized very well many
people live their lives in a sort of
loop of knowing doing gratification they
know what they got to do maybe they
struggle to get motivated to do it then
they do it and then they feel some
gratification because they've done the
thing they knew they had to do so this
is a really simple loop and it covers
things like going to do the groceries
and many mundane particular pragmatic
tasks in life knowing doing
gratification but is this the way to a
meaningful life or is this the meaning
of life no it doesn't scale up very well
it doesn't generalize very well it's not
small it's not well-suited to the more
profound questions we get into when
talking about the
of life keep in mind that most people
commit to things without knowing them
first they commit to Marxism without
having really read the works of Karl
Marx yet they commit to Buddhism while
knowing remarkable a little about
Buddhist philosophy most professions and
jobs that people commit to they only
find out the hard way afterward what the
job really entails what it's really like
as a child you might have some notion of
what it's like to be a nurse and then
you find out the hard way what a career
in nursing really means its advantages
and disadvantages you could be 20 years
old and still not really understand what
you're getting into when you sign up for
nursing in general or you sign up for a
very specific job or field within
nursing for me I got involved with
economics thinking economics was gonna
be the philosophy of poverty I get to
the Department of Economics at
university it's unbelievably depressing
department where everybody's just trying
to get rich and going to real estate and
work as a hedge fund manager this kind
of thing that's not what I signed up for
when I was studying economics I found it
inspiring and interesting rewarding I
had a sort of humanitarian set of goals
and interests and I ended up in the
wrong Department
so instead of a cycle of knowing and
doing and gratification the way we live
with the more profound decisions and the
more profound unexpected events that
unfold their lives is a cycle of doing
doting and then doing again it's a cycle
of learning where we most often have to
start off with action with initiating
action - even with undertaking them a
certain set of convictions that leads to
action this kind of thing but then we
have to continue to doubt those
convictions or doubt those commitments
doubt those choice Romanians we go so
that it's a learning process people ask
me questions all the time like is it
worthwhile for them to study Buddhist
philosophy not is it worthwhile for
everyone or anyone but is it worthwhile
for this particular person to start
studying with us and then what what
would I recommend that they
give them their particular interests or
what is they're trying to do in their
career or academia or something the
hardest answer for people to live with
is maybe the hardest thing to do is to
commit yourself to hundreds of hours of
hard work whether that's on Buddhist
philosophy or learning the Chinese
language or going to college to become a
nurse and studying for that chemistry
exam so you can go to nursing the
hardest thing is to commit yourself to
the hard work to the suffering that it
entails without knowing whether or not
this is the right thing to do without
knowing whether or not it's a mistake
you're going to regret later and it's
hardest of all to really be honest with
yourself about that it's hardest to keep
that stage of doubt in the cycle of
doing and doubting and doing again it's
very very hard for most people to live
with the knowledge I don't really know
so if you undertake the study of
Buddhist philosophy you're starting off
probably just with an awareness there is
a bookshelf in the library that says
Buddhist philosophy that's really all
you know you know there's a category of
books to be found in this you don't know
what its contents are gonna entail what
its gonna mean you may have some really
misleading ideas from watching kung fu
movies you may have some ideas about
yourself and how you're gonna become a
better person by studying this or you
may have some use you're gonna try to
apply it to like maybe you think I'm
gonna be better able to teach
non-violence or something by studying
this philosophy or I'm gonna be able to
do reconciliation or I'm gonna be able
to help people in prisons deal with
their rage you may have all kinds of
misconceptions or expectations or hopes
or dreams whatever it is but you're
gonna start by undertaking this labor in
darkest ignorant and you're inevitably
going to suffer as you realize that the
task you've undertaken is not the one
that you had imagined it would be that
the outcomes can't be what you've
anticipated that's it's not even saying
sometimes I'm saying absolutely all the
time
when we're dealing with these questions
that are
about the meaning of life and I
meaningful life if you're going to the
grocery store to buy a tube of
toothpaste yeah sure that's that goes
back to mode one you know what you're
gonna do you do it then maybe you feel
some gratification after the fact the
type of gratification you can get out of
leading a meaningful life is instead the
gratification of realizing how ignorant
you were before and what it is you've
learned and then the sense in which
you're better off now
the process of your own disillusionment
is what lets you know that you're
leading a meaningful life and you may
well say what do you mean I don't have
any illusions that's right
whenever you start the process at any
stage you don't think you have illusions
you enroll in the study of economics at
university you decide to become a nurse
let's be more specific you decided to
come an x-ray technician or nutritionist
maybe something more specific than just
nursing in general and you you don't
think you have illusions about that
profession or about that academic
discipline but you do and in that
process if you have the detachment if
you have the self-discipline to stick to
to stick to that kind of doubt not to
cling to some kind of belief not to try
to convince yourself that you know this
is meaningful and you know you're going
to be gratified by accomplishing this
goal if you can if you can keep that
kind of detachment of doubt ongoing then
you're gonna recognize the degree of
your own disillusionment when you find
out how different these things really
are from what it was you had expected
what it was you had had dreamed about or
yearned for people want to resort to
saying it's not about the answer it's
about continually asking the question
and I think that is ultimately dishonest
that really we have to challenge
ourselves to move beyond these
stereotype notions of oh well it's about
the journey not the destination or
rights it's just a methodological
question of you know how to how to
continually engage with the question of
what is the meaning of life know
ultimately what I have had is the luxury
of making the wrong decision
and learning the right things from them
and moving on you can do that with
Buddhist philosophy you can't do that
with a tattoo you can't do that with
heroin you can't do that with cocaine
right so the the gravity of making the
wrong choices the gravity of miss
apprehending what will lead you to a
meaningful life the consequence of
spending five years studying Buddhist
philosophy in your spare time and then
coming to the conclusion you know what
this philosophy it doesn't really answer
the questions I thought it would answer
or maybe it doesn't help me in my career
as a conflict resolution counselor or
doesn't doesn't have what I was hoping
for that's not going to harm you but
tragically we live in a world where
people all the time
or making decisions whether it's
something as seemingly benign as getting
addicted to playing video games or
something as seemingly wonderful as
falling in love and getting married you
know people make decisions that have
catastrophic long-term consequences for
them so when you're talking about a
meaningful life there's really a pretty
limited range of legitimate questions
that we can include in saying it's about
the journey not the destination or it's
about a mode of questioning more than
it's about any specific answer I have
one friend who always wants to ask me is
it or is it not a good use of his time
to go to the gym and lift weights for
however many hours per week the hardest
answer for people to live with is I
don't know the hardest answer is maybe
the hardest answer is you can't know
until afterwards when I was younger I
thought that vanity would have no place
in my life when I was at grown-up like
wow you know what's the point why not
just be fat and ugly when you're a
middle-aged person who cares why would I
care about vanity today there's a sense
in which man it doesn't matter I would
never wear a jewelry or a gold chain or
anything in some ways that live up
monastic life but on the other hand I do
think health and fitness and strength
justify a certain number of hours going
to the gym but maybe I'm wrong maybe I
don't know maybe I'm gonna look back at
this period of time in my life and think
wow I made the wrong decision I should
have been pouring my time and effort
into learning Chinese as a language and
not into bench-pressing over a hundred
kilograms what was the point of doing
that at 40 years old maybe I'm gonna
look back at that and think that's
vanity vanity of vanities I have to live
with that uncertainty I have to live on
the razor's edge of that kind of doubt
with what I do intellectually and
physically with what I do in the pursuit
of leading a meaningful life if you
undertake humanitarian work what are the
outcomes you're pursuing are you trying
to make yourself a better person are you
trying to make you know the poor but
better off you're trying to help poor
people with this humanitarian work
you're doing the hardest thing is to
undertake humanitarian work not with the
faithful delusion that you you're
certain you know you're doing the right
thing but to undertake it at every step
with a canny measure of detachment and
self-doubt with an awareness that the
outcomes are beyond your control that
it's very likely you're going to have
terrible regrets and that when it's all
over you're going to look back and be
able to measure the extent to which this
was a meaningful part of your life
precisely because you were disillusioned
by it precisely because you didn't
accomplish the things you said to
accomplish maybe you accomplished
something else maybe at a minimum you
can say I accomplished turning myself
into the person that I know I am
[Music]
you